Who's the strongest guy in the room? Is
it the hardest worker or is it the guy
who really is just taking it easy? It's
never the guy who's taking it easy.
>> With some of those findings, you indeed
you have to just check the like the the
common sense/ anecdotal results if it
makes any sense at all. But, you know,
in a few cases, science can really show
us that we've been really wrong. Like
high rep training, which is now pretty
established to be just as effective as
lower rep training for muscle as long as
you go close to failure.
[Music]
Mano, thank you for joining me today.
>> Glad to be here.
>> Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. So, for the
audience, Meno and I have been talking a
little bit about the exercise and the
lengthened position, lengthened
partials, and stretch mediated
hypertrophy, which are actually two
different things. Define those two
things for everybody.
>> They might be two different things. We
don't know if they are the same thing. I
I do think that it might involve at
least similar mechanisms like passive
mechanical tension on the muscle thereby
stimulating muscle growth. We know that
passive and active tension can both
stimulate muscle growth. But it's bit
hard to think of how something like a
lengthened partial or you know doing leg
extensions at a bit longer muscle length
how that would equate to like super high
passive tension. We know that there is
passive tension and one study found in
leg curls that if you equate for the
passive and active tension you get
similar growth and in regular machines
we have a study that found seated leg
curls grow the hamstrings more than
lying leg curls specifically in the
heads that were stretched more. So I
think that's a very strong proof of
principle study that you know long
length training can increase muscle
growth. But yeah, in in recent um years,
the literature or last year
specifically, the literature has a lot
been a lot more disappointing,
especially in trained individuals. Now,
we can go into that and how that uh
differs and what the implications are,
how to interpret that research because
there are a lot of nuances to that. But
yeah, we have a lot of studies on
stretch mediated hypertrophy in the the
literal sense in which it was originally
meant that if you stretch a muscle a lot
then like really really high intensity
usually you'll need something like a
orphetic device like a calf stretching
boot something like that to have like
you know eight out of 10 pain scale
really hardcore static stretching for a
doorway in stretching your pectorals.
>> Yeah. And then for for a long duration
you know not like a stretch and you know
a minute like some of these studies it's
an hour per day.
So that stimulates very robust muscle
growth as much as strength training in
some research. Like in one study, I
think that one was even in trained
individuals,
>> doing that kind of hardcore calf
stretching, like an hour a day led to
the same amount of muscle growth as
doing 15 sets per week of calf raises.
So that's really intense.
>> Yeah,
that is that is interesting. I mean, in
in a way, it makes sense. Here's why I I
really thought there was something
profound there. You if you look at
sprinters, sprinters can grow their
quadriceps, they use about 7 degrees of
flexion behind the knee and they have,
you know, le slightly less than 180
degrees available. Yet, they only use
seven. However, if you look at like the
sprint cyclists on, you know, the VO
drone, for the people who don't know
what that is, like sometimes you see
guys racing bicycles on a banked
circular track. So, the track is like
this and and they're riding, you know,
sort of on the wall around because
they're going so fast. Uh they use a
full range of motion and they have
ridiculously giant quads. So that's why
I thought, yeah, I mean, full range is
certainly better. So you don't you don't
just want strong range. I I wondered
just from an evolutionary standpoint.
Humans always will try to use efficient
movements as opposed to inefficient
movements. Which means if you know if
you watch a mover pick up a piano,
they're going to be very strategic about
how they do it and they're going to put
force through the body where they're in
their stronger ranges of motion. So they
don't really have to move very much and
put joints at risk because ultimately if
you're a mover, you're not trying to
grow muscle, you're just trying to move
the furniture. So we're always picking
efficiency. And I thought, wow, if the
stretch position was the most anabolic
from an evolutionary perspective,
that would be crazy. Like, how the [__]
are we not all dead? Like, how did we
grow muscle? Because like, no, nobody
would have known that in the past. So,
it just it just made me wonder. It's
like, I know there's something there
from the sprinters to the bikers,
especially with full range. But then you
know like I said the isolated lengthened
maybe maybe not. However that was just
my thoughts before getting into anything
involving exercise science. I mean my
background is really bone density. Um
so you know the bone density devices
that I developed osteopor those
specifically are I mean very short range
compressive movements in the impact
ready range of motion. So you know if
I'm outstretch my arm I'll have 120
degree angle from upper to lower arm
back on my hand in line with the
clavicle in a position where I'd
normally absorb impact if I were to trip
and fall. And so that's one of the
movements and we have these in 300
locations in 15 different countries.
It's very successful. Grows bone density
very well.
It doesn't grow a lot of muscle mass.
It's not the intention, but it activates
a lot of tissue. It does a lot of
neurological things like people notice a
functional difference which could be
measured as strength, but it's it's
really just I think they're better at
activating the musculature.
And so when I had the opportunity to
fund this these last two studies, I I
jumped at it because I want to know the
answer. And also with X3, see I think
just because I'm a student of variable
resistance,
we get the luxury of going to momentary
muscular fatigue in the strong range, in
the mid-range, and in the lengthened
range. So like as you go to fatigue, you
know, I'm I'm I'm doing repetitions to
whatever I can do them to. like let's
say my chest press, you know, 240 kilos
and then I can't get there anymore and
then I'm doing 200 kilos in the middle
then my last maybe 100 kilos and th that
range may only be like 2 in off my
chest. So, a lengthened partial. I got a
great video on it, but
most of fatigue and I tal I talked to
Professor Shenfeld about this when I
went to write that check and I said in a
way it's like going to fatigue and the
lengthen range of motion is where
everybody goes to fatigue for absolutely
everything.
So like it's it in a way it's I I just
we got to know like I I don't I don't
know how to express
how I want that answer because I just
want to be able to explain what I'm
doing. You guys want to be able to
explain what you're you're doing. And I
mean I loved what what everybody did,
what what Milo did. I loved what how
you've been promoting it. And and it's
just sad to see these like kind of
internet commenter dumb asses uh just
you know I mean they're so rude. I mean
it's like you guys don't even know what
you're talking about which I suppose is
one of the problems with the internet in
general. Most of the people with the
strongest convictions
really don't understand the subject.
>> Yeah. On the internet you have very
strong negativity bias and it shows up
in a lot of different ways.
I find it's always very important to
realize that with our levels of audience
when you you know you're reaching an
entire city of people at a minimum. So
if and if a post goes viral then you
know occasionally you might reach like a
small country worth of people and if you
think about okay an entire city of
people how many of those are reasonable?
How many of those are educated? How many
of those know what they're talking
about? How many of them are just having
a very bad day maybe? You know maybe had
something going on in their personal
life. And then yeah, you get a lot of
people that have what seem like very
absurd comments, but it's usually the
minority. The comment section does not
represent the the silent majority in a
lot of cases. That's also uh comforting
to know often.
>> Yeah.
>> But yeah, there's a lot of people are
there are certainly a minority of people
that's very vocal, very entitled, very
rude, and also not very knowledgeable,
which is can be tough to deal with.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's you know why they have
a lot of free time.
>> Mhm.
>> Yeah. Nobody wants them around. What are
what are the two studies you you helped
fund? You had the um was it the one with
Milo with the trained individuals
lengthened partials versus full rom and
the lateral raises?
>> Yes, those two.
>> Right. Yeah, that's interesting. Yeah,
the lateral races one I didn't see
coming. I thought cable lateral raises
would beat dumbbell but uh didn't and
then lengthen partials also equal to
full range of motion in the other study
and trained individuals. Definitely
dampened the the hype train a bit on the
whole length and partials uh long length
training.
Yeah, I don't think they the results
surprise me
as much just because I' I've gotten so
much out of variable resistance, but you
know, also it's like I want the real
answer. I don't want to like look at it
through my biased lens of, you know, I I
want to give a thumbs up to my product.
It's like no, [__] that. I just want to
know the answer. And if my product
doesn't do the right thing, I'll adjust
my product so that it does. And um yeah,
I'm just kind of proud of everybody
involved. They did a lot of hard work
and both those studies were kind of a
[__] to write and they did them very
quickly. They collected the data very
quickly and you know in a in a time when
I would say the election of the US
president may have been won based on
people just getting irritated that
they've been lied to about their health
information and about science and about
research.
It's very refreshing that a bunch of
guys who've been promoting one way of
doing it published the research that
shows that that one way might just be as
good as the other way that they were
doing before. And I just I just think
that's kind of awesome.
>> Yeah, for sure. Like for example, Milo
is he went really hard on the length
partials and length and training
bandwagon, if you will. But he still he
publishes the research and he's
completely open to like the evidence
which is great. Yeah, you can have your
opinions and the most important thing is
that all of the people that you've
mentioned, we're all truth seekers in
the end. Like, you know, we care about
the truth. So, we're even if we're not
right right now, then we're going to be
right as more evidence emerges and it
becomes more clear. And some of us are
going to be right earlier, but that
doesn't mean that, you know, our views
or arguments were better. It's just,
yeah, we had it right this time, and all
of us have been wrong at some point
about some things in the past for sure.
And we're going to be wrong about things
in the future as well. But ultimately,
we're going to be on the right track.
And that distinguishes people like us, I
think, from charlatans who will just
promote whatever to make a quick buck
and then stick to it no matter what
because it's their ego or corporate
profit or whatever that was that biases
them.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's we got to get to
the truth. And each one of these things
is a stepping stone to getting the
better data, building better
programming. Like there's nothing
negative about it. It's just I mean I
can see somebody being frustrated if all
of a sudden they were doing every single
set as lengthened partials and they're
like a this is no better than what I was
doing before. Damn it. I'm like
>> Mhm. Yeah.
>> Yeah. On the bright side, it also
doesn't appear to be worse, which is
already a lot because if you had told
people this a couple years ago, like you
can train with partial range of motion
and get the same results as with full
range of motion, they would have said no
way. So in that sense, it's it's already
a good thing. But the important point
you touched on was the the distrust in
science these days and I see that a lot
on on social media my own social media
accounts as well
>> that you see the survey data there's
like this there's less trust in in
governments in the media I mean legacy
media have really screwed themselves
over they have very little credibility
left in the eyes of intelligent people I
think that's right
>> yeah but also institutions governments
especially education in the US like the
whole woke thing really took a big toll
and then co with the lockdowns and the
masks and a lot of the sort of signs and
being people being extremely convinced
about some things that turned out to be
wrong. So that also took a big hit and I
think a big part of uh lay individuals
in understanding science that they don't
grasp is that what you're saying every
study is a piece of the puzzle and a
study is never going to directly reflect
reality. So if we have say 15 studies on
long length training versus full length
motion or shorter ROM training then
we're going to see some trend there. And
I mean the trend is still in favor of
long length training because to my
knowledge there isn't any study that
finds greater muscle hypertrophy with
shorter length training. So in that
sense you could still make a good case
for it. But in trained individuals the
trend is currently mostly neutral in
based on the latest studies although the
the recent study the case study from
Eric Helms is quite interesting to maybe
discuss. But you know even like with
protein literature you know we have this
idea of there's a certain target around
0.8 gram per pound and
>> right
>> the the study the individual study
results they're clustered all over that
region you know based on the study
design
>> scatter plot is ridiculous.
>> Exactly. And that's because people don't
exactly stick to the diets. They have
different protein sources. People also
vary somewhat individually in terms of
how much protein they actually need.
People vary in how hard they train,
which in in turn influences their
protein requirements, how advanced they
are. There's a million different things
that influence these factors. And that's
true for any individual study. So you
have to look at studies as like every
piece of the puzzle. And the more pieces
you put together, the more clearly you
see where like what the the truth
probably is. And given a certain truth,
the results are going to always kind of
scatter around the the truth. So if long
length training is indeed superior to
shorter length training then you're
going to see that in most of the studies
being positive or neutral or a trend
towards positive and very few findings
towards the opposite. Right? If if it's
really a scenario where it's like
>> one study finds long length training is
better the next study finds short length
training is better and it just kind of
fluctuates all the time. That would be
super weird. Then people would be right
to say like okay science what's this?
And we've seen that before. And
sometimes it's just bad study design.
Like how much conflicting evidence did
we have with how many reps in reserve?
>> Mhm. I mean,
>> yeah. Although I mean there too, you you
don't see a lot of research where, for
example, people just grow more muscle
when they train further away from
failure, right?
>> It's like it's neutral or better. So
it's mostly a similar trend. But yeah,
the the variance is huge in in those
studies. I I I did think that was funny
when when that started coming out a few
years ago promoting very far, you know,
like a long number large number reps in
reserve. It's just like, wait a minute,
okay, let's let's just take humans out
of it. If you look at the if you just
look at a group of like predatory
animals, is it the hardest working
animal that gets strongest or is it the
laziest animal that gets strongest?
>> Like come on. like that that doesn't
make any sense. And it's like, you know,
when I'm when I'm at Westside Barbell,
it's like who's who's the strongest guy
in the room? Is it the hardest worker or
is it the guy who really is just taking
it easy? It's never the guy who's taking
it easy.
>> With some of those findings, you indeed
you have to just check the like the the
common sense/ anecdotal results if it
makes any sense at all. But, you know,
in a few cases, science can really show
us that we've been really wrong. like
high rep training, which is now pretty
established to be just as effective as
lower rep training for muscle atrophy.
As long as you go close to failure,
>> which is great for body weightight
workouts and if you're training with
your X3 bar, all these types of things,
you have like a much
>> compromised joints.
>> Yeah, exactly. So, you have a much
broader range of options and that's
something that again, it's not that high
training is better. So, it's it's not
that surprising, but it's equally
effective. It's like an an alternative
option that nobody even considered
before we had the science. Like say 10
years ago, everybody would have said if
you'd said I train with 30 reps per set,
they would have been like that's
ridiculous whether you're training for
cardio or that's but you can do a lot of
muscle that way.
>> Yep.
Yeah. I I knew this would be a good
conversation. These are all things where
people need to realize like they're all
issues where we got a little bit of
information at a time with each study
and then built just a better
understanding. Um, I think what's from
time to time I pick up like a physiology
textbook and I just roll through the
references and you know when you see
just like a couple thousand references
like Yeah. Like it was not one single
study where they're like, "Okay, now we
got the one. Let's write the book about
this." You know, it's not that.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Like really thinking of a
as a piece of the puzzle is is really
important for mindset to interpret
science and thinking of like again a
neutral one of the big things that you
can expect is that neutral findings are
almost the norm in exercise science
because studies have small sample size
relatively short duration and then
especially if you do them in trained
individuals. Okay, you have trained
individuals doing an 8week program.
Realistically, how much muscle growth
are you really going to see? Right.
>> Hard to notice.
>> Exactly. it's it's hard to even make
them make gains. So then you have these
small gains in one group and then you
have to also show that another group
made greater gains than than they did.
That's like that's two tall orders in in
one study.
>> So many of these studies are just going
to be like yeah there's like a range
here of of growth and a range here of
growth. And it's like we can't really
see if if there's a difference there. So
if a study does find a difference, it's
significant evidence, but it could also
be a fluke in some cases. But you can
expect that even if there is something
there, most of the studies are probably
going to report nil results. So no
significant differences between groups
>> because it's a very high barrier that we
have in scientific research to say this
is really a difference.
>> And if you had two large samples control
and test, a smaller amount of
variability would still reach
statistical significance. Whereas with
smaller sample sizes, that's harder to
prove. You need a greater distance
between the two groups. And all the time
like some some physician will be like
well you know like this study you're
referring to doesn't have a big enough
sample size
and um like you do realize that actually
it's more powerful if it reached
significance with a smaller sample size.
And I've never met a single medical
doctor that didn't also have a
background in statistics that knew that.
>> They're like blown away when I'm like
they're like wait are you sure? Yeah
man. like we can we can look it up. They
had no idea. And also, I think part of
the reason physicians are pretty lousy
at recommending exercise.
They're so conditioned to look at
pharmaceutical studies. And this this is
another reason why, you know, the United
States is changing its health care
system. As of yesterday, when Trump got
inaugurated, I was there. It was really
cold. But like when I talked to Robert
F. Kennedy Jr., The pharmaceutical
industry has created a game that only
they can play because they want studies.
They've conditioned physicians to look
at studies that have tremendous sample
sizes. Well, there's no exercise science
study that's going to have the budget
to have a big enough sample size like
that or a nutrition study. Like if if
you and I just want to do like, you
know, what is the carnivore diet better
than the sub diet? Like let's say we did
that. Well, I mean, we wouldn't have
like 300,000 people in each group
because who's going to fund that?
>> Yeah. And the funny thing if with the
the biio medical industry or the
pharmaceutical industry specifically is
that when you have these super large
sample sizes, you also see this in
epidemiology epidemiology,
then even very small effects can become
statistically significant. So, what
you're saying if you have significant
effects in a small study, there is
somewhat greater chance of type one
error, so it being a fluke, but that's
not common. And type two error is much
more common. And in these large studies,
you actually have the problem that they
test some drug and it's like marginally
effective. You know, if you have an
illness that normally seven days, it's
now six days and it costs a lot of
money. But they will publish that as
significant result. Great finding. This
is an effective drug and you'll easily
get that drug all over the market and
people will buy it. But in reality, it's
like, oh well, it's a lot of money and
realistically you're like, you know, one
day less illness, which might just not
be worth it for a lot of people.
>> Yeah.
Yeah. Exactly. This is a conversation I
want to have. I want I think people will
benefit from uh from hearing about that.
>> Great. Happy to talk.
>> Yeah. Fantastic. If this video helped
you, I want you to subscribe and follow.
I'm going to put out videos on a regular
basis. I think they're going to help a
whole lot of people, especially if
you're one of those people that doesn't
just instantly grow from lifting regular
weights. We've got the answer for you.